Markup language that will be used to built a web pages, Hypertext Markup Language. As it says, HTML analogous as a structure. On this part will be introduce to HTML in depth.

## Root Project Directory
When creating a web pages, we only need is a project folder. Inside the folder or project directory we need a HTML file which end up with .html as extension for naming the files. 

## Structure & Anatomy
HTML has a basic structure, among them are *doctype, html, head, body*. Each HTML element has two tag, <> *opening, ... content,* and </ > *closing*. When creating element on HTML we can write an attribute which give additional information for the element, it can determine the behavior of element itself. Each element can become a child for the element itself, for the example`<head>` and `<body>` was the child-element from `<html>.`

> For further reading references from MDN Web Docs:
> - [HTML attributes reference](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes)
> - [HTML elements reference](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element)

HTML document needs fundamental structure for displaying the web pages correctly.  As mention earlier, there's a basic structure will explain below.
1. **`<DOCTYPE html>`** is a format refering the version of HTML and contain a groups of rules need to be adhering on building a website better.
2. **`<html>`** is an element used for telling the browser that this is a HTML document.
3. **`<head>`** is an element function to stores HTML document information, that includes some element like *meta, style, icon* or *link*.
4. **`<body>`** is an element which contain a web pages content.