# Introduction
On this module, we're going to learn about:
- [[#Cloud Computing]]
- [[#Physical, Virtual & Cloud Architecture]]
- [[#Google Cloud Architecture]]
- Example of Google network which power the cloud computing

## Cloud Computing
The hot topic these days, the term is a way of using information technology that has five equality important traits.
1. Customers get computing resources (on demand and self service)
2. Customers get access to resources over the internet anywhere
3. The provider allocates the resources to users out of that pool
4. The resources are elastic (increase or decrease as needed)
5. Customers only pay for what they use

IT infrastructure is like city infrastructure in a nutshell, there is *lamps, roads, or pipe water* as the **infrastructure**, there is *variety of transportation* as the **applications**, and there is *people or human* as the **users**.

## Physical, Virtual & Cloud Architecture
The variety of cloud computing which is ***Colocation*** that comes as the first wave. The second wave is ***Virtualized Data Center***, with this types the users can take control and configure the environment. The third wave come as ***Container-based*** which makes all the services automatically provision and configure the infrastructure used to run applications.

Cloud service offerings some types  like IaaS and PaaS. 
- The IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service) offering things like *raw compute, storage,* and *network capabilities* to maintain by the users. 
- The Pass (*Platform as a Service*) offering bind code to libraries which provide access to the infrastructure applications need and allows more resource to be focused on application logic.
- SaaS (*Software as a Service*) applications are not installed on your local computer; they run in the cloud as a service and are consumed directly over the internet by end users.

As cloud computing has evolved, the momentum has shifted toward managed infrastructure and managed services. Serverless is yet another step in the evolution of cloud computing, the serverless computing allows developers to concentrate on their code, rather than on server configuration, by eliminating the need for any infrastructure management (i.e. Cloud Run, Cloud Functions).

## Google Cloud Architecture
The first layer of architecture is ***Network and Security*** which lays as the support foundation. On the next layer sit ***Compute and Storage*** which separates so they can scale independently. And on the top layer sit the ***Big Data and Machine Learning*** products which enables the task perform to ingest, store, process, and deliver business insights, data pipelines, and machine learning models.

> You can accomplish these tasks without needing to manage and scale the underlying infrastructure.

Google offers a range of computing services, which includes: ***Compute Engine, Google Kubernetes Engine, App Engine, Cloud Functions, Cloud Run***. Also, it offers a variety of managed storage options ***Cloud Storage, Cloud SQL, Cloud Spanner, Cloud Bigtable,*** and ***Firestore Cloud SQL & Cloud Spanner***. And then there’s a robust big data and machine learning product line, this includes: ***Cloud Storage, Dataproc, Bigtable, BigQuery, Dataflow, Firestore,  Pub/Sub, Looker, Cloud Spanner, AutoML,*** and ***Vertex AI***.

## Google Network
Google’s network is the largest network of its kind, and Google has invested billions of dollars over the years to build it. This network is designed to give customers the highest possible throughput and lowest possible latencies for their applications.

Google Cloud’s infrastructure is based in five major geographic locations: North America, South America, Europe, Asia, and Australia. Having multiple service locations is important because choosing where to locate applications affects qualities like availability, durability, and latency, which measures the time a packet of information takes to travel from its source to its destination.

Geographic locations contains the ***locations, regions,*** and ***zones***. 
1. Locations define the specific area (i.e. Europe).
2. Regions represent independent geographic areas (i.e. europe-west2).
3. Zones is composed by regions divided (i.g. europe-west2 has three zones, europe-west2-a, europe-west2-b, and europe-west2-c). This is are where the cloud resources are deployed.


# Start with a Platform
In this section, we'll explore different ways to interact with Google Cloud.
1. Explore the [[#Google Cloud Console]]
2. [[#Understanding Projects]] for enabling and using Google Cloud services
3. Identify [[#How Billing Works]]
4. [[#Installing & Configuring Cloud SDK]]
5. Recognize the difference use cases for [[#Cloud Shell]] and editor
6. Explore how [[#Cloud API's]] work
7. Manage Google Cloud services from [[#Mobile App]]

## Google Cloud Console
There many ways to interact with Google Cloud, using *The console, Cloud SDK & Shell, API's,* and *Cloud Mobile App*. 

The Google Cloud console is graphical user interface based with a simple web-based graphical, easily to find a resources, and provides a search facility. 

## Understanding Projects
The console is used to access and use the resources which organized in projects. The project has the hierarchy with four levels starting from the bottom up; *resources, projects, folders,* and *organization node*.

**The resources**, represent as a virtual machine, Cloud Storage buckets, tables in BigQuerry, or anything else in Google Cloud. Thus thing are organized into projects. **The projects** is organized into folders or subfolders, and the top level is an organization node which encompasses all the rest of level. 

Projects are the basis for enabling and using Google Cloud services, like managing APIs, enabling billing, adding and removing collaborators, and enabling other Google services. Each project has three identifying attributes ***a project ID, project name,*** and ***a project number***.
- The project ID is a globally unique identifier assigned by Google that cannot be changed–it is immutable–after creation.
- The project names, however, are user-created.
- Google Cloud also assigns each project a unique project number.

Google Cloud has the Resource Manager tool to do that programmatically. It’s an API that can gather a list of all the projects associated with an account, create new projects, update existing projects, and delete projects. It can even recover projects that were previously deleted and can be accessed through the RPC API and the REST API.

The third level of the Google Cloud resource hierarchy is folders. You can use folders to group projects under an organization in a hierarchy. To use folders, you must have an organization node, which is the topmost resource in the Google Cloud hierarchy.

## How Billing Works
Billing is established at the project level which means that when you define a Google Cloud project, **you link a billing account to it**. A billing account *can be linked to zero or more projects*, but projects that aren’t linked to a billing account can only use free Google Cloud services.

Billing accounts are **charged automatically and invoiced every month or at every threshold limit.** Billing sub accounts can be used to separate billing by project.

### Budgets
It's a billing tools which **helps to make sure we don't run up the bill.**
1. You can define **budgets** at the billing account level or at the project level. *A budget can be a fixed limit, or it can be tied to another metric*, (e.g. a percentage of the previous month’s spend.)
2. To be notified when costs approach your budget limit, **you can create an alert.** Alerts are generally set at 50%, 90% and 100%, but can also be customized.
3. **Reports** is a visual tool in the Google Cloud console that lets you *monitor expenditure based on a project or services.*
4. Google Cloud also implements **quotas**, which are *designed to prevent the over-consumption of resources* because of an error of malicious attack
	- **Rate quotas** reset after a specific time.
	- **Allocation quotas** govern the number of resources you can have in your projects.

> If you’re interested in estimating cloud computing costs on Google Cloud, you can try out the Google Cloud Pricing Calculator at cloud.google.com/products/calculator.

## Installing & Configuring Cloud SDK
The Cloud SDK is a set of command-line tools that you can **use to manage resources and applications** hosted on Google Cloud. These includes:
1. the **gcloud CLI**, which *provides the main command-line interface* for Google Cloud products and services.
2. the **gsutil**, which lets you *access Cloud Storage from the command line*.
3. and **bq**, a *command-line tool for BigQuery*.

## Cloud Shell
The next way to access and interact with Google Cloud is Cloud Shell. **Cloud Shell provides command-line access to cloud resources directly from a browser.** It’s a Debian-based virtual machine with a persistent 5-GB home directory, which makes it easy to manage Google Cloud projects and resources.

> To start Cloud Shell, navigate to [console.cloud.google.com]() and click the Activate Cloud Shell icon on the toolbar.

With the Cloud Shell code editor, **you can edit files inside your Cloud Shell environment in real time within the web browser**. This tool is convenient for working with code-first applications or container-based workloads, because you can easily edit files without needing to download and upload changes.

## Cloud API's
The third way to access Google Cloud is through application programming interfaces, or APIs. The services that make up **Google Cloud offer APIs so that code you write can control them**.

The Google Cloud console includes a tool called the Google APIs Explorer that shows what APIs are available, and in what versions. Google provides Cloud Client and Google API Client Libraries in many popular languages to take much of the drudgery out of the task of calling Google Cloud from your code.

## Mobile App
The fourth and final way to access Google Cloud is through the Cloud Mobile App. The Cloud Mobile App **provides a way for you to manage services running on Google Cloud directly from your mobile device**.

1. The Cloud Mobile App can be used to start, stop, and use ssh to connect to Compute Engine instances and to see logs from each instance.
2. It also lets you stop and start Cloud SQL instances.
3. Administor applications deployed on App Engine.
4. Up-to-date billing information for projects and alerts for those going over budget.
5. Customizable graphs showing key metrics. 
6. Alert and Incident management.

> Download the Cloud Mobile App at cloud.google.com/console-app.


# Google Cloud to Build Apps
In this module, you’ll be introduced to how to build apps directly in Google Cloud.
1. Explore the role of [[#Compute Options in the Cloud]].
2. Learn about building and managing virtual machines.
3. Examine [[#Configuring Elastic Apps with Autoscalling]].
4. [[#Exploring PaaS with App Engine]] options.
5. Examine building [[#Event-driven Services using Cloud Functions]].
6. Identify containerizing and orchestrating applications with Google Kubernetes Engine.
7. Identify developing and deploying scalable containerized applications with Cloud Run.

## Compute Options in the Cloud
Google Cloud offers a variety of compute services spanning different usage options. 
- For general workloads that require dedicated resources for your applications, **Compute Engine** is a good option. 
- If you’re looking for a platform as a service, **App Engine** is a good option. 
- **Cloud Functions** offers a serverless option for triggering code to run based on some kind of event. 
- To run containers on a managed Kubernetes platform, you can leverage **Google Kubernetes Engine**. 
- And **Cloud Run** is a fully managed serverless platform that lets you develop and deploy highly scalable containerized applications.

### Exploring IaaS with Compute Engine
With Compute Engine, **users can create and run virtual machines** in Google's innovative data centers and on its global fiber network.
1. No upfront investments.
2. Thousands of virtual CPUs can run on a system that's designed to be fast and offer consistent performance.
3. Each virtual machine contains the power and functionality of a full-fledged operating system.
4. Run any computing workload such as web-server hosting, application hositng, or application backends.

A virtual machine instance can be created by using the **Google Cloud console**, which is a web-based tool to manage Google Cloud projects and resources, or through the gcloud CLI. The instance **can run Linux and Windows Server images** provided by Google or any customized versions of these images, **can also build and run images of other operating systems** and flexibly reconfigure virtual machines.

## Configuring Elastic Apps with Autoscalling
With Compute Engine you can choose **the most appropriate machine properties for your instances**, like the number of virtual CPUs and the amount of memory.

To do this, Compute Engine has a feature called *autoscaling*, where VMs can be added to or subtracted from an application based on load metrics. The other part of making that work is balancing the incoming traffic among the VMs. With Compute Engine, you can in fact configure very large VMs, which are great for workloads such as in-memory databases and CPU-intensive analytics, but most Google Cloud customers start off with scaling out, not up. The maximum number of CPUs per VM is tied to its “machine family” and is also constrained by the quota available to the user, which is zone-dependent.

> Specs for currently available VM machine types are at cloud.google.com/compute/docs/machine-types

## Exploring PaaS with App Engine
App Engine lets you build highly scalable applications on a fully managed, serverless platform. App Engine is ideal if time-to-market is highly valuable to you and you want to focus on writing code without ever having to touch a server, cluster, or infrastructure. 

App Engine also provides built-in services and APIs, like NoSQL datastores, Memcache, load balancing, health checks, application logging, and a user authentication API that is common to most applications.

App Engine also offers SDKs, each includes:
- APIs and libraries
- Sandbox environment
- Deployment tools

There are two types of App Engine environments: **standard** and **flexible**. The first is the App Engine standard environment, which is based on container instances running on Google's infrastructure. Containers are preconfigured with a runtime from a standardized list of supported languages and versions, which include libraries that support App Engine standard APIs.

A standard environment workflow typically follows these three steps:
1. First, a web application is developed and tested locally.
2. Second, the SDK is used to deploy the application to App Engine.
3. Third, App Engine scales and services the application.

App Engine also offers a flexible environment. If the standard environment’s sandbox model is too restrictive for you, the flexible environment can let you specify the type of container your web application will run in. This option lets an application run inside Docker containers on Google Cloud’s Compute Engine virtual machines.

## Event-driven Services using Cloud Functions
Cloud Functions is serverless code that lets you run it based on certain events. With Cloud Functions, you could write a single-purpose function that completes the necessary image manipulations, and then arrange for it to automatically run whenever a new image is uploaded. 

Cloud Functions is a lightweight, event-based, asynchronous compute solution that allows you to create small, single-purpose functions that respond to cloud events without needing to manage a server or a runtime environment.

