On this module will be introduce some web concepts, how the internet works, and the anatomy of website.

The first one we learn about **what is website?** according to [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Website) website is a collection of *web pages* that is identified by a domain name which published on *web server*. There's some word that will be covered on this module.


## How Internet Works?
Website accessed by using the internet. The tools that can show up the web pages is called *a browser*, so the internet will allows user to **sent** a request and **receive** the data of website. But then, how the website send the request including the data? that happen because the user's computer are connected with other and its called *a server*. 

> A **client** is who request, and the **server** is who response.

^Client-Server

The user's computer (client) communicate with the server through the **network***, server receives its request and response to them so that the web pages could be displayed on client's computer, whether using cable or wireless.

The larger the network created, the more computer will be connected and communicate with each other computer. So, to do that the computer will need *route* to reach other computer using internet, known as Internet Service Provider (ISP).


## Website & Web Pages
There's two main different between website and web pages, it's actually used everyday whether on desktop or mobile devices. This section will talk about those two things.

> The *Web pages* is a single page that shows information, including text, images, or other types of media.

> The *Website* is a group of all web pages which connect one another (hyperlink) on one domain or different. Generally, a website carry an information for one person or even organization and its stored on a ***server***.


## Web Server
According to the [MDN Web Docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/Web_mechanics/What_is_a_web_server), a web server can refer to hardware or software and both of them working together.

> On the hardware side, a web server is a computer that stores web server software and a website's component files.

> On the software side, a web server includes several parts that control how web users access hosted files.

Then, how the request and response can happen? same as the [[#^Client-Server]] above in quote. Browser which client have will send things called ***a request*** to the server and client receive the data called ***a response***.


## DNS Server
Every computer connected to the internet will have IP Address, if we have an access using the IP for website it will be difficult to remember the IP's that sometimes could changes. So here the domain name server comes to play.

> Domain name is not replaced the IP role, instead the browser will ask the server to identify which IP has the domain name.


## Web Browser
Client will need a software for *displaying* a web pages. Not only to one web pages, but every active website all around the world could be accessed by a web browser.

Once user accessing website using Uniform Resource Locator (URL), the browser will create a request and send it to web server. Then, the web server will send the response which including the requested content. The client and web server communicate using HTTP protocol.
###### Request-Response Cycle:
1. The user open a website with URLs
2. Browser will create and send a HTTP request to web server
3. Also, receive a HTTP response from web server as a result
4. Then, the browser shows the content requested


## Website Anatomy
Basically, the website were built with three main foundation:
1. HTML is a markup language which determine the web structures
2. CSS is a markup language which gives the styling for the web pages
3. JavaScript is programming language supported by browser to gives interactivity for web pages

Those three component are the most vital on building a website. 