On this module will covering some styling from Cascading Style Sheet. Styling is important thing to a web pages, it becomes a standard by W3C for setting document visualization which written using HTML.

> CSS known as *declarative language* which used to declare a value used to decorate visual of HTML in browser.

The benefit of using CSS for website:
1. Can control and implement precision layout
2. Avoid repetitive work for styling
3. Supported by many browsers


## How Style Sheet Works?
A style sheet work starting from HTML document which have tag element, writing styling guide to decide visual element, and attaching those styling guide into HTML document.

> **`<div>`** element used to give a styling guide for the content they wrap up to have visually better.


## Writing Styling Guide
Writing a styling guide made up with one or more guide, it is called with ***rules*** and ***rule-sets*** which describe the way an element visualize inside a browser.

The first step to learn CSS is to understand a *rule* part. For example, to state the color for **`<h1>`** element and set the font size on paragraph element.
```
h1 {
  color: green;
}

p {
  font-size: small;
  font-family: sans-serif;
}
```

There's **two parts** to create a rule. First, choosing the *selector* which element to implement the rule. Second, declaring the instructions will be implement by a selector.
```
Selector  Declaration
   |      |     |
   v      v     v
   h1{color: green;}
        |       |
        v       v
     Property Value
```

```
Selector  Declaration Block
   |           |     
   v           |     
   p{          v
     font-size: small;
     font-family: sans-serif;
   }
```

### Selector
The selector is called from element type and it's common use. A declaration will be implemented for all the element that has been given a property and it's value.

### Declarations
On declarations there will be a property with their values, and on every declaration needs to be ended up with *semicolon* (;). Remember that CSS it's doesn't care with spacing, so would be better to write new property on new line.
```
p{            
  font-size: small;
  font-family: sans-serif;
	   
  /* new property, write it on new line*/
}
```


## Attaching a Styling on HTML Document
After understanding the way to write a rules, this section will cover on how to attach those rules into HTML document. Actually, there is three ways in implemented styling on HTML element, ***External Style Sheet***, ***Embedded Style Sheet***, and ***Inline Style***.

### External Style Sheet
Using this way will split the CSS rules into another independent documents. The document will use **.css** as the extension that will be connected with HTML document. This way is the most powerful on implemented the styling. 

> To connect **.css** files into HTML, can be done using **`<link>`** element with **`rel`** attribute (*relationship*) inside the **`<head>`** element. This can be used to connect local style sheet files or even online.

```
<head>
  <!-- Import css files -->
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="path/to/styles.css">
</head>
```

### Embedded Style Sheet
Is a set of rules which written inside the HTML document with **`<style>`** element involved. With this method, only those file with styling written inside can have the visual to be set. This **`<style>`** element can be placed inside **`<head>`** element on HTML document.
```
<head>
  <title>Document Title</title>
    <style>
      /*
      * Rules styling here
      */
    </style>
</head>
```

### Inline Style
This method will implement the styling directly on HTML element, using **`<style>`** attribute. 
```
<h1 style="color: green">Content</h1>
```

> To multiply the styling properties, can be done inside the same attribute. But, *semicolon* (;) is utilize as the separator.


## CSS Conception
There's some concepts on CSS should be understanding before deep dive into the details with styling.

### Inheritance
HTML styling tend to be *inheritance* which mean it can be inherit some styles properties from a element to another inside. For the example, the CSS rules which implemented on **`<body>`** element will also implement to all the child-elements automatically.

### Group Selector
If some different selectors has the same properties implementation, then it can be merge using *group selector*. Which can minimize repetitive code writing.
```
h2{
  color: #00A2C4;
}
h3{
  color: #00A2C4;
}

/* can be written into group selector */

h2, h3{
  color: #00A2C4;
}
```

^Group-Selector-Color

### Rule Order
According to its name, this concept is the way of CSS read the code. It's *cascading* from above to the bottom. So, it's very important to take a look while writing the code, because when conflict appears it is causing by the implemented styling inside the same HTML document and overrides other styling rules.

> To make a *styling property* considered as important by a browser, it can be done by adding keyword **important** at the end of the property value.

```
p{
  color: red !important;
}
```



## In-depth with CSS
Previously, already know with fundamental concepts of CSS like the syntax, how it works, inheritance, grouping selector, and rule order. But there's so many things to learn about CSS in-depth.


### Basic Selector
There's so many selector types that can be used for targeting the rules to certain element on HTML document.

#### Type Selector
This selector use the element name as a target for implemented the rules. When using this selector, the rule will be applied to all the target element.
```
/* the text inside <span> element will become red*/
span{
  color: red;
}
```

#### Class Selector
This selector set the element target based on value of *class attribute*. To write a selector, starting with dot (.) and continue with its class name.
```
> HTML:
<p class="fancy">Content here...</p>

> CSS:
.fancy{
  font-weight: bold;
  text-shadow: 4px 4px 3px #77f;
}
```

The class tend to be *shareable* means that can be use to another variety elements. Also, each element can have more than one class value to applied.

```
        1st Class
            |
<p class="fancy great-color">Content here...</p>
                     |
                 2nd Class
```

It can also targeting the specific element which has a class, as the example while applying different styles *fancy* class on a paragraph, it can be done by writing the name of target element and followed by dot (.) for the class.
```
.fancy{
  font-weight: bold;
  text-shadow: 4px 4px 3px #77f;
}

p.fancy{
  text-shadow: 4px 4px 3px #00c8eb;
}
```

#### ID Selector
This selector  set the target element based on value from the attribute ID which applied on the element. It's same as class, but is not *shareable* and only one element with unique ID owns it. *Hash (#)* symbol is used to create this selector type.
```
> HTML:
<div id="fancy-special">
  <!-- Content here... -->
</div>

> CSS:
#fancy-special{
  background-color: skyblue;
}
```

> This selector ID needs to be *unique*. So, if there's a bunch of rules want to apply, then class attribute would be better.

#### Attribute Selector
This is the way to set the target element based on attribute being used and specific to its value.
```
a[href]{
  color: blue;
}
```

| Syntax              | Description                                                              |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **`[attr]`**        | Targeting element which has *attr* attribute applied                     |
| **`[attr=value]`**  | Targeting element which has *attr* attribute with *value* applied        |
| **`[attr~=value]`** | Targeting element which has *attr* attribute and one of them is *value*. |
| **`[attr^=value]`** | Targeting element which has *attr* attribute and starting with *value*.  |
| **`[attr$=value]`** | Targeting element which has *attr* attribute and ended with *value*.     |
| **`[attr*=value]`** | Targeting element which has *attr* attribute and include with *value*.   |
#### Universal Selector
This selector used for applying into all element. But, also can be specified target. *Asterisk* symbol is used to create this selector.
```
*{
  color: green;
}

*.fancy{
  font-style: italic;
}

*#fancy-special{
  font-style: bold;
}
```

### Combinators
For all the selectors, *combinators* can be used to it. There's four types; ***Adjacent Sibling Selector***, ***General Sibling Selector***, ***Child Selector***, and ***Descendant Selector***.

#### Adjacent SIbling Selector (+)
Is a selector which combine two basic selector using (+) between them. For the example, the rules is applied to paragraph after image element.
```
img + p{
  color: grey;
}
```

#### General Sibling Selector (~)
Same as Adjacent, but the rules will be applies to all the element which in after the first element as long they have the same parent.
```
img ~ p{
  color: green;
}
```

#### Child Selector
Combining two basic selectors with *greater than* (>) symbol between them. Example, the paragraph element is a child of div element.
```
div ~ p{
  color: green;
}
```

#### Descendant Selector (Space)
It is same as child, but the hierarchy is more wide which will be applies to all its derivatives.
```
div p{
  background-color: yellow;
}
```


## Pseudo Selector
The selector targeting element by the *invisible* part, often used for hovering a cursor to an element.
```
a:hover{
   color: blue;
}
```

### Pseudo-class Selector
This is a *inactive* class which actually available on each HTML element. As previous example for *hovering* , there's other option for *:visited*. For using pseudo-class colon (:) is the starting between basic selector.

> For further reading, visit MDN Web Docs
> - [Pseudo-classes](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Pseudo-classes)

### Pseudo-element Selector
Same as pseudo-class, this often used for adding the content before and after the element. To use it, pseudo-element has two which **`::before`** and **`::after`**. The added content is written inside the CSS files.

> For further reading, visit MDN Web Docs
> - [Pseudo-elements](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Pseudo-elements)


## Text Formatting
With CSS font and text could be styling, when to use the font styling or set the text. Those two things are split because each has their own properties. 

### Font Styling
When creating a text document, styling the fonts is important for visual purpose. On CSS, a fonts are set to have certain property which can be use to modify the types, sizes, wights, etc.

Here's some lists for fonts properties:
- **`font-family`**, used to set the font types
- **`font-size`**, used to set text sizes
- **`font-weight`**, used to set font weights
- **`font-style`**, used to set font styles
- **`font-variant`**, used to specify text variants
- **`font`**, a shorthand for font properties available

#### Font Family
This properties will change the font standard which used by the browsers.
```
body{
  font-family: sans-serif;
}

/* the font family can be write more than one */
body{
  font-family: "Open Sans", Cambria, sans-serif;
}
```

> Quoting used to wrap the font value which has spacing.

- **`@font-face`** is used to applied external font into CSS.
```
@font-face{
  font-family: "JetBrains Mono";
  src: url('to/the/font/path.ttf');
}

/* after declared the font-face, now can be used to all element*/

p{
  font-family: "JetBrains Mono";
}
```

> For further reading, visit MDN Web Docs
> - [@font-face](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face)

#### Font Size
To change the font size, this property could help to solve the problems.
```
h1{
  font-size: 1.5em;
}
```

Units for settings the font size has two types:
- **Relative Unit**: The value depends on a thing. (i.e viewport, parent element, etc). The units are **`em, ex, rem, ch, vw, vh`**.
- **Absolute Unit**: The value has been set as the real world. The units are **`px, pt, pc, mm, cm, in`**.

#### Font Weight
This property is used to set the **boldest** of font displayed, using numeric values from 100 - 900 or with descriptive terms *normal, bold, bolder,* and *lighter*.
```
.fweight{
  font-weight: value here..;
}
```

#### Font Style
To create a posture for the text, this properties could help. There's some types of form like *normal* and *italic or oblique*.

### Text Styling
Formatting can be given to a text on web pages. Some property might useful like ***Line Height***, ***Text Indent***, and ***Text Alignment***.

#### Line Height
The property used to set the minimal range (*spacing*) of line on text. This can be applied to all the element including their child-element.
```
.ln2{
  line-height: 2;
}
```

#### Text Indent
When creating a document, sometimes it needs range from first pargraph and that can be done using this property. To count the length, **px, em** and **%** percentage can be used.

> This property only effect the first line of paragraph.

#### Text Alignment
It's like word processor, the property can change the alignment of text into ***left***, ***right***, ***center***, and ***justify***.
```
p.tl-center{
  text-align: center;
}
```

#### Text Decoration
Popular property for creating an *underline* on text. But not just that, there's some other value that can be used on this property.

| Values                              | Function                                   |
| ----------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| **`text-decoration: underline`**    | Gives the underline to the text            |
| **`text-decoration: overline`**     | Gives the overline to the text             |
| **`text-decoration: line-through`** | Gives the strikethrough effect to the text |
| **`text-decoration: none`**         | Remove the decoration from text            |

#### Text Transform
This property will transform the text capitalize.

| Values                           | Function                                            |
| -------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| **`text-transform: none`**       | Text displayed as the same                          |
| **`text-transform: capitalize`** | Makes the first characters on every word capitalize |
| **`text-transform: lowercase`**  | Makes all the characters on every word lowercase    |
| **`text-transform: upercase`**   | Makes all the text capitalize                       |

#### Word and Letter Spacing
Previously, on line height will gives spacing upper and bottom of the text, this property will gives spacing to each characters (**`letter-spacing`**) and to each word (**`word-spacing`**).
```
.letter-spacing {
  letter-spacing: 4px;
}

.word-spacing {
  word-spacing: 1.5em;
}
```

#### Text Shadow
This will gives a drop shadow effect to the text element on HTML. The things to know is all the value that used on this property.
1. First value, will shown how far to the left and right (*horizontal*) of the shadow.
2. Second value, will shown the range of upper and bottom (*vertical*) of the shadow.
3. Third value, will specify the blur effect.
4. Fourth value, will set the color used for the shadow.

```
.shadow {
  text-shadow: 2px 2px 0px #000000;
}
```


## Coloring
A website with color gives a life. On this section will be covering about coloring with CSS on a HTML documents.

On CSS there's two ways to set a color into elements, ***numeric value*** and ***predefined color name***.

```
// This is a numeric value (RGB / HSL)
color: rgb(78,231,35);
color: hsl(104, 82%, 50%);

// This is a predefined color name
color: #4ee715;
```

### Color for Text and Background
With CSS text and background can have a life with coloring properties.

#### Text Color
Just using color property, the text element will shown the color choosen. See [[#^Group-Selector-Color]].

#### Background Color
CSS treats every HTML element like on the box and **`background-color`** property can gives the color for that box.
```
> HTML:
<body>
  <main>
    <!-- Content here... -->
  </main>
</body>

> CSS:
main {
  background-color: #333333;
}
```

### Opacity
HTML element can be given the opacity effects which makes the element itself transparent.

| Value    | Description                                       |
| -------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| 0%       | The element not visible                           |
| 1% - 99% | The element still visible with transparent effect |
| 100%     | The element fully visible                         |
```
p {
  background-color: red;
}

p.opacity-50 {
  opacity: 50%;
}
```


## Box Model
On [[#Background Color]]  says each element displayed as a boxes. Like other form of boxes which includes ***width*** and ***height*** of content, empty space known as ***padding***, edge known as ***border***, and range from other elements known as ***margin***.

> On CSS, each of those thing can be arranged and that's called **box model**.

### Box Dimensions
Actually, the box which created by the element will always enough to fit the content, but here the dimensions can be change with **width** and **height** property. Nowadays, the development often using *percentage* and *ems* to set the size of the box which can adaptive with every size of screen.
```
> HTML:
<body>
  <div class="box">
    <!-- Content here... -->
  </div>
</body>

> CSS:
.box{
  height: 75%;
  width: 75%;
}
```

> In traditional development, sometimes *pixels* are still used for the unit.

### Limiting Dimensions
Modern website has the ability to displayed the layout widens and narrows followed by the user screens. The principle from that ability is to create a size limitation that can be set, so that the content always displayed in proportional. Here's **`min-width`** and **`max-width`** comes to play.

- **`min-width`** will sets the *minimum* width value that must be had for the element.
- **`max-width`** will sets the *maximum* width  value that must be had for the element.

```
.content {
  max-width: 800px;
  height: 400px;

  margin-left: auto;
  margin-right: auto;
  background-color: #333333;
}
```

### Overflowing Content
The boxes always fit is not applicable if the width and length value is set to manual, there would be *overflow* content. To solve the case of overflow content, the overflow property is used.
- **Visible**,  is the default value on this property, the content which overflow will stay displayed as it was.
- **Hidden**, if the overflow occurs, the content that doesn't fit will be hidden.
- **Scroll**, this will show a scroll bar for the content, so that the content that doesn't fit still displayed.
- **Auto**, same as the scroll, but when isn't overflow the default value will be visible.

### Box DImensions
On CSS3 using **`box-sizing`** has the ability to choose the types of other measurement to be set on determine the element dimensions. **`border-box`** and **`content-box`**.

### Box Borders
The edge of the content area is called border and padding is optional. This property can change the types, weights, and line colors of border that will be displayed.

#### Border Width
This **`border-width`** property used to set the weight of border, the values can be a pixel or even predefined name values like *thin, medium,* and *thick*. Percentage values are not used here.
```
.box {
  border-top-width: 2px;
  border-right-width: 1px;
  border-bottom-width: 1px;
  border-left-width: 2px;
}

/* or can be done like this */

.box {
  border-width: 2px 1px 1px 2px; /*top right bottom left*/
}
```

#### Border Style
Types of border can be set using **`border-style`** property, which has some value can be used on this property.

| Property Value | Description                              |
| -------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| **`solid`**    | The lines is solid not dashed            |
| **`dotted`**   | The lines shown dot arrange              |
| **`dashed`**   | The lines forms with short lines arrange |
| **`double`**   | The lines forms with two lines arrange   |
| **`groove`**   | The lines forms like a frame             |
| **`hidden`**   | The lines are hidden                     |
```
.box{
  border-style: property value here...;
}
```

#### Border Color
The last property used to gives a color for the border.
```
border-color: color values here...;
```

#### Shorthand
CSS can handle the shorthand to create a border with single property only. The property has three values that can be used which is **widht**, **type**, and **color**.
```
.box {
  border: 4px dashed #00a2c6;
}
```

### Box Padding
It's used to create a range between content area and the border. This will gives a space for the content inside the element to be more comfortable to display.
```
p {
  border: 4px solid #00a2c6;
  width: 350px;
}

p.example {
  padding: 10px;
}
```

There's four types of padding, for the *top, right, bottom,* and *left*. Each can be declare but also can be written into one like this.
```
/* each direction declare */
padding-top: 10px;
padding-right: 15px;
padding-bottom: 10px;
padding-left: 15px;

/* shorthand */
padding: 10px 15px 10px 15px;
```

### Box Margin
Same as *padding*, margin is a space for an element. But, the space is available outside the content and border element.
```
/* each direction declare */
margin-top: 10px;
margin-right: 15px;
margin-bottom: 10px;
margin-left: 15px;

/* shorthand */
margin: 10px 15px 10px 15px;
```

### Centering Content
When creating a box which precisely on the center of the pages or inside the parent element, margin left and right can be set to ***auto***. But, it needs to set the width of boxes so that the browser will automatically gives the same range for the boxes to be placed on the center.
```
/* the boxes width */
.box {
  width: 50%;
  border: 4px solid darkblue;
  padding: 20px;
  margin-bottom: 20px;
}

/* the centerized property */
.box.center {
  margin: 0 auto;
}
```

### Display Roles
The HTML element standard has two types, which is ***block*** and ***inline***.

|                    | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **Inline Element** | 1. HTML element comes as default without new line  created.<br>2. The width and height value of inline element in the amount of content inside and can't be change.<br>3. Margin and padding only effect the horizontal element, not vertical.                                                               |
| **Block Element**  | 1. HTML element comes as default adding new line when it's created.<br>2. If the width is not set, then the width from block element will fulfill the width of browser or the element which copes it.<br>3. The block element dimensions can be set.<br>4. Inside the block element, HTML tag can be stored. |
With using **`display`** property, *inline* element can be change into *block* and vice versa. The value from this property shown below;
- **`inline`**, change block element act as inline element
- **`block`**, change inline element act as block element
- **`inline-block`**, create a block element but is not adding new lines once is created, instead still keeps the block element behavior.
- **`none`**, used to hide the element from pages.

### Box Shadow
This property works the same as [[#Text Shadow]], it gives the shadow around the box element (*margin not included*) with **`box-shadow`** property.
```
.box {
  width: 200px;
  height: 200px;
  
  box-shadow: 6px 6px 5px 10px #666666;
}
```

### Rounded Corner
The property introduce on CSS3 which gives the corner of boxes with rounded using **`border-radius`** property.
```
/* each corner declare */
.rounded {
   border-top-right-radius: 5px;
   border-bottom-right-radius: 10px;
   border-bottom-left-radius: 5px;
   border-top-left-radius: 10px;
}

/* shorthand */
.rounded {
   border-radius: 10px 5px 10px 5px;
}
```


## Positioning
Previously, already learn on how to move the position from an elements using margin. But, when doing it will impact the others element position surrounding. The solution is to implement the **`position`** property to change the *position schema*.

- **Normal Flow / Static Flow**, it's *a default behavior* of element where's every block element will shown on new lines once created.
- **Relative Positioning**, this will create an element to do a displacement from up, right, bottom, or left at first position.
- **Absolute Positioning**, same as *relative*, the element will displace element position. But, the position is relative towards the browser window and the position also can be relative to parents element as long is at outside normal flow.
- **Fixed Positioning**, this is a absolute position, but it's always relative with browser window. Even when the users do a scroll and the position will stay from the screen.

> For further understanding, visit MDN Web Docs
> - [Position CSS](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/position)



## Viewport Meta Configuration
This tag will make the element responsive on smaller screen. To set the viewport it can be done using **`<meta>`** tag inside the **`<head>`** element.
```
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1">
```

## Media Queries
Giving a responsiveness more specific, *media query* can solve that by writing the exact width.
```
@media media-type and (media-feature-rule) {
   /* CSS rules here */
}
```

Above rules can be declare like this:
- **`media-type`**, is an type of media which come as guidance for a browser on applied the styling code. The type given is *print*, *screen*, or anything.
- **`media-feature-rule`**, the condition that must be fulfill so that the styling code can be applied. The conditions are viewport size, screen orientation, and devices type.
- **`media-block`**, a bunch of CSS rule that will applied if those two point earlier not fulfill.

> For further reading, visit this link:
> - [Responsive web design basics](https://web.dev/articles/responsive-web-design-basics)
> - [Viewport meta tag](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Viewport_meta_tag)
> - [Beginner's guide to media queries](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/CSS_layout/Media_queries)

